.TH BART 1 "March 2026" "0.1.32" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bart \- A fast, highly visual directory analysis tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bart
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIPATH\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bart
is a command-line tool written in Rust for analyzing and visualizing directory usage. It goes beyond combining `tree` and `du`, acting as a temporal filesystem profiler with interactive filtering, semantic code grouping, and beautiful emoji-based terminal output.
.PP
By default, bart performs a parallel directory scan respecting .gitignore rules and highlights hotspots based on their size relative to their parent directories. It leverages visual density encoding and semantic emojis to provide immediate clarity into directory contents.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-depth " "\fIDEPTH\fR
Maximum depth to display. (default: 1)
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-limit " "\fILIMIT\fR
Number of top entries to show per directory (0 for all). (default: 0)
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-sort " "\fISORT\fR
Sort output by \fBsize\fR or \fBname\fR. (default: size)
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-watch
Watch the directory for live updates.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-filter
Launch the interactive TUI to filter by file format and perform actions such as open, edit, and remove.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-ignore
Do not respect .gitignore rules and include typically ignored directories (such as .git, node_modules, target).
.TP
.BR \-\-json
Export the entire directory structure to structured JSON format.
.TP
.BR \-\-csv
Export the entire directory structure to CSV format.
.TP
.BR \-\-diff
Compare the current directory against the previous scan, displaying a differential size breakdown (NEW, DEL, and Δ).
.TP
.BR \-\-explain
Perform a deep semantic breakdown showing exactly why a directory is large (e.g., Rust Build Artifacts, Vendored Dependencies, Text/Markdown).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help information.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B EDITOR
The editor to use when editing files in the interactive TUI (\fI--filter\fR). Defaults to `nano` if not set. This can also be configured in `~/.bartrc` by setting `EDITOR=your_editor`.
.SH EXAMPLES
Scan the current directory up to depth 1:
.RS 4
.B bart
.RE
.PP
Find out exactly why your project is so heavy:
.RS 4
.B bart \-\-explain
.RE
.PP
Compare how much space was added or removed since the last scan:
.RS 4
.B bart \-\-diff
.RE
.PP
Launch interactive format filtering TUI:
.RS 4
.B bart \-f
.RE
.PP
Export a complete directory scan (depth 999) as JSON:
.RS 4
.B bart \-\-json \-\-depth 999 > report.json
.RE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs on the GitHub issue tracker at https://github.com/elci-group/bart/issues
.SH AUTHOR
elci-group
